Welcome back to the course, in this lecture we
will discuss a second topological sort algorithm:
Kahn's algorithm. The previous one was based on
dfs, but this one is based on bfs. And personally,
I prefer this one and find it more intuitive,
I think that it will also be the case for you.
Okay let's take the example we've
been working with, this graph.
Let's suppose that we want to find what's the
first course we will take. It can not be any one,
for example we cannot start with course 6
because it has courses 0 and 3 prerequisites.
Courses we can start with are
ones with no prerequisites,
we can directly take them. To identify them,
we can count the in-degree of each vertex,
remember that the in-degree of a vertex is the
number of edges entering in it. And a vertex with
an in-degree of 0 means that it has no edges
entering in it, so it has no prerequisites.
In this example we have courses 0, 1, 2, and 13,
we can start with them. We decide to take them
in this order, 0 1 2 13, and let's see what
happens when doing so. We took the course 0,
what does it mean? It means that 0 is now a
satisfied prerequisite, which implies that
all vertices whose 0 is a prerequisite for, have
one less constraint now, because it's satisfied.
In our case 0 is a prerequisite for 3 and
6, we remove that constraint from 0 to them,
and we subtract their in-degree because
the edge kinda doesn't exist anymore.
For course 6, it still has another constraint,
we cannot take it yet, and same thing for 3,
it has two other constraints. Next course
we decided to take is 1. And by taking it,
we satisfy another constraint for 3, we
decrement its in-degree. Next course we
decide to take is 2. It's a prerequisite
for 4 and 5, they have one less constraint.
4 still has an unsatisfied one, but what about 5?
5 had only one prerequisite, taking 2 before it,
which is what we did now, so it has no
more unsatisfied ones, we can take it.
This is why we put it in the queue
of courses we're planning to take.
Next course is 13, we take it, and
it has one outgoing neighbor, 14.
But 14 still has unsatisfied
courses, we cannot take it yet.
Next course is 5, we take it, and
its outgoing neighbors are 4 and 8,
they have one less constraint now. 5 was
the last unsatisfied constraint of 4,
so we can take 4 now, all its constraints
have been satisfied, we add it to the queue.
Next one to take is 4, we take it, and now 3
7 and 8 have one less remaining constraint.
3 and 8 now have 0 remaining
constraints, we add them to the queue.
I think that you started understanding the
algorithm we're using here, we started by
counting the in-degree of each vertex, then we
added courses with no prerequisites to the queue,
those with an in-degree of 0. After
it, for each element in the queue,
we take it, in other words we add it to the
ordering, and we check its outgoing neighbors.
For each neighbor, we decrement the in-degree,
because if you noticed, the in-degree here
represents the number of remaining unsatisfied
constraints, this is why every time we take
a course, it's not unsatisfied anymore, we
decrement in-degree of its outgoing neighbors.
And if the in-degree of a neighbor becomes 0, then
we satisfied all its constraints, we can take it,
we add it to the queue, we just finish courses
that entered before it and we go to it.
Let's continue with our example, it should
be easier to understand now that you know
the method we're using. Next one is 3, we take
it, and now 6 and 7 have one less constraint.
We can't take 7 yet, but 6 has no more unsatisfied
courses, we can take it, we add it to the queue.
Then we have 8, we decrement in-degree of 11, it
becomes 0, we add it to the queue. Then we have 6,
we decrement in-degree of 9 and 7,
they both become 0, we add them.
Then 11, we decrement in-degree of 14, but it's
not 0 yet. Then 9, we decrement 10 and 12. Then 7,
we decrement 10, and we can take it now. Then
10, we decrement 12 and 14, they become 0,
we take them. Then 12, it has no outgoing
neighbors, and 14, same thing. The queue is
empty now, so we finished the process, we got
our ordering, 0 1 2 13 5 4 3 8 6 11 9 7 10 12.
You can notice that even if it's the same example,
we didn't get the same ordering as the one we got
with the dfs algorithm in the previous lecture.
Which is not surprising because both algorithms
behave differently, and a topological sort isn't
always unique as said in the introduction,
the important is that it respects conditions.
During the example we've seen the pseudocode
of this algorithm, let's try to implement
it. First of all we need to count the
in-degree of each vertex, how to proceed?
The in-degree of a vertex is the number of
edges entering in it, so for each edge (u,v),
we increment the in-degree of v, the
destination. With an adjacency list,
for each edge (u,v), u is the key, the source,
and v can be found in the array graph[u].
This is why we traverse vertices u, and for each
vertex v in graph[u], we increment indegree[v].
In code we start by creating a hash table indegree
with 0 as a default value, a hash table where the
key will be a vertex and the value its in-degree,
0 as a default value because we didn't start
traversing edges yet. Now for each vertex u
in the graph, for each vertex v in graph[u],
we increment indegree[v], that's it. After it
we said that we create a queue where we put
vertices whose in-degree is 0, for each vertex,
if its in-degree is 0 we add it to the queue.
Now we create ordering array, and we keep
traversing vertices in the queue until it
becomes empty, we write while not queue.empty().
We extract a vertex, we add it to ordering,
and we traverse its neighbors to decrement
their in-degree. For each neighbor, here we're
talking about outgoing ones, we decrement
indegree[neighbor]. And if it becomes 0,
then we can take the vertex neighbor, we add it to
the queue, as we were doing in the example. And it
keeps looping like that, we traverse vertices
and see what neighbors each vertex unlocks.
After the loop, ordering is ready, we return
it, and we finished implementing our solution.
But it looks like something
is missing: the visited set,
we didn't use a visited set. Is it a mistake? Is
it done on purpose? Take some seconds to think.
It's not a mistake, it's done on purpose, but
why? In breadth-first search, the visited set
is here to avoid adding the same vertex to the
queue multiple times, because if it happens,
we traverse again vertices that we traversed
before, which is useless most of the time.
And a vertex is susceptible to be added multiple
times to the queue in two cases: when itself
or one of its incoming neighbors has multiple
incoming neighbors, and when there is a cycle.
We deduce that when a vertex is guaranteed
to be added to the queue no more than once,
we don't need the visited set. Like in
an arborescence, where the in-degree
of each vertex is 1 except for the root, its
in-degree is 0, and where there is no cycle.
Here we don't need the visited set. But what
about our case? That's the question. Even if the
in-degree of some vertices is greater than 1, each
vertex will be added to the queue exactly once.
Why is that? The reason behind it is that we have
a condition before adding to the queue, it's that
indegree of the vertex is 0. Which happens only
once, when being on the last incoming neighbor.
Imagine this scenario, the vertex 4 has 4
incoming neighbors 0 1 2 and 3. In classic bfs,
4 would be added multiple times to
the queue if visited set isn't used.
But in our algorithm, when being on 0 we decrement
in-degree of 4, but it doesn't reach 0. Then on 1,
we decrement, not zero yet. Then on 2,
we decrement, same thing. Finally, on 3,
we decrement, and here it became 0 so we add it
to the queue. It's getting added only once as you
can see, even if we had millions of incoming
neighbors, so we don't need a set visited.
Same as for dfs, we initially
assume that the graph is acyclic,
but what if it had cycles, what would happen
with this algorithm? Let's see with this example.
Vertices with 0 as in-degree are 0 1 and
2, we add them to the queue. We start
with 0, it decrements in-degree of 3. Then 1, it
decrements in-degree of 3. Then 2, it decrements
in-degree of 4 and 5, 5 becomes 0 so we add it to
the queue. Then 5, it decrements in-degree of 4.
The queue became empty, the process stops. We can
see that we got no infinite loop, but the process
stopped without traversing all vertices, the
ordering is incomplete. It's incomplete because
we found that we can take 0, after it 1, after it
2, after it 5, but we couldn't find another vertex
to take, because all remaining vertices still
have unsatisfied constraints. And because we have
a cycle, then we have interdependencies, here 4
is waiting for 6 to unlock it, 6 is waiting for 3
to unlock it, and 3 is waiting for 4 to unlock it,
they're kinda blocking each other from continuing.
This is why we have nothing to put
in the queue, the process stops.
Remember that when there is a cycle, when
we cannot find a full ordering of vertices,
we're returning an empty array. So after the
while loop, we can check if we could finish
the process by checking the length of ordering.
If it's smaller than the number of vertices,
then there was a problem, we return an empty
array. Else we return ordering normally.
Our solution now handles the case
where we have a graph with cycles,
you can also see that handling cycles is way
easier in this algorithm than with the first one.
And same as for the dfs algorithm, this one
can also be used to detect cycles in a graph,
if topological_sort returns an empty array
and graph is not empty, then there is a cycle.
For the time complexity, we start by traversing
the adjacency list to count in-degrees. The outer
loop does |V| iterations because it traverses
vertices, and the inner loop's number of
iterations depends on the outdegree of the vertex,
because we're traversing outgoing neighbors.
We know that the sum of outdegrees of vertices of
a directed graph is the number of edges, |E|, so
traversing an adjacency list costs |V|+|E|. Next
step, we search for vertices with an in-degree
of 0, for that we just traverse vertices, which
costs |V|. And last step, traversing vertices in
breadth-first search. Even if we're not using
a set visited, but we're making sure that
each vertex enters the queue once, we get a cost
similar to the classic bfs algorithm, O(|V|+|E|).
By adding everything, we get an O(|V|+|E|) time
complexity for this algorithm. And for the space
complexity, we have indegree, it has |V| keys, and
we have |V| for the queue and the ordering. |V|
for the queue and the ordering because when we pop
a vertex from the queue we add it to ordering, and
each vertex enters the queue at most once, so the
sum of their lengths doesn't exceed |V|. We get
an O(|V|) space complexity. We've now studied two
topological sort algorithms, one that uses dfs and
one that uses bfs, also called Kahn's algorithm,
I hope that you understood them both, otherwise
you can ask me questions. See you in the next
lecture where we will see a practice question.